
√47f

With time Martijn found prayer to be his refuge from the anxiety and rage that often gripped him since the accident. Even though the initial vision of his Christian brothers and sisters never returned, the feeling of quiet reverence and humility before a benevolent power remained and strengthen. But he felt like a fraud. So he told himself it was a form of therapy, or maybe yoga for the mind. He didn’t, he couldn’t, believe in God, he didn’t understand the concept that Jesus died on the cross for his sins.
			Gradually he realized that instead of explaining prayer away as a normal therapeutic experience, he was able to suspend disbelief when he prayed and he had long conversations with God. He felt an openness which made the conversations deeply meaningful, caused him to reach understanding which he never would have otherwise, to feel comfort, even peace. All he had to do was pretend to believe, then the feeling of actually believing quickly kicked in. When he finished praying, he would compartmentalize the whole question of belief so as not to surrender his lifelong atheistic views, nor to spoil what he had now discovered with Sara’s guidance. Martijn realized all he needed was reverence for an all-powerful God during the time he closed his eyes in prayer. Then the prayer worked.

Prayer soothed his primal fear of riding the train to work. With  prayer he didn’t need to agitatedly engage strangers in conversation to make the half-hour ride bearable. Sara had told him to remember that Jesus was with him. He didn’t need to grip the seat or monitor every sound the train made while en route.

Prayer also soothed the rages that he had been prone to since the accident.

• • •


	At home, Martijn said to Rika, ”Can I see what you are doing."
			"You haven't sneaked a peak yet?"
			"Not really. Whenever I go up there, it just seems such a mess -- "
			"Ha!"
			"I mean, it's a kind of chaos, I'm not sure what you are working on and I don't want to be turning around all the canvas and maybe spoiling them and getting paint on my hands."
			"I think I should set up a little exhibition for you then. You deserve at least to know what kind of artistic talent you are living with."
			"Fair enough. Let me know when you are ready.”



   • • •

Sara and Martijn didn’t have a church but they formed their own tiny Christian community. Sara reminded him that Jesus had said :
			“For where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I with them.”
			Martijn knew that Bible scholars debate whether this quote is was use the quote out of context, but that was irrelevant because he and Sara both felt the special strengthened presence of Jesus when they read the Bible or prayed together. They would meet to read scripture and they read the Gospels together on the phone. The Psalms was their favorite.

Sara could say the most beautiful and moving prayers. For Martijn that was the best part of all. He liked Sara very much.

• • •

Martijn realized that the concept of God was there in him already, he had simply expressed ongoing contempt for it. The shift to reverence was surprisingly easy to make and the feeling of a powerful presence was clear when he turned to it. And the prayer unlocked so much for him. How strange, he thought, we atheists have been locking ourselves out of real life experiences for the sake of rejecting an imaginary God. To reject something imaginary and lose something real seemed irrational to Martijn. He began to have a new feeling, he began to wish that he really was an unconditional believer, like Sara.

He realized that he felt he owed something to atheism, that faith  in God would be a betrayal. When he realized that he felt this emotional commitment to atheism, he understood that what he thought of as atheism was at least for him a form of religion in itself. He liked Christianity better.

• • •


When he was with Sara, Martijn wanted to be a believer. He felt comfort and strength in the faith she shared with him. When he spoke he felt like a hypocrite saying strange words, but he also felt they were true. He realized to becoming a believer from his starting point meant suspending disbelief. When he was alone this made him uncomfortable, he felt he was a hypocrite, or alternatively, that he was giving up his identity. He found the best thing was not to think about belief when he was away from Sara, unless he felt drawn to pray and his connection to God was temporarily reestablished. The more he thought of it, the more he wanted to be a believer, to believe as much as Sara.


 • • •
 

